How we got to sweden post (#1)
churnikov/churnikov.github.io: _posts/2022-11-10-sköldpaddan-or-moving-to-sweden.md

    alt: "Bathroom"
  - url: "https://blog-image.fra1.cdn.digitaloceanspaces.com/sk%C3%B6ldpaddan-or-moving-to-sweden/Stockholm/photo_2023-08-04%2018.30.02.jpeg"
    image_path: "https://blog-image.fra1.cdn.digitaloceanspaces.com/sk%C3%B6ldpaddan-or-moving-to-sweden/Stockholm/photo_2023-08-04%2018.30.02.jpeg"
    alt: "Bathroom"
---

We moved to Sweden on the 18th of September 2022. Our journey began in Saint-Petersburg on the 16th, 
from where we traveled to Helsinki by bus. On the 17th, we boarded a ferry to Stockholm.

While this summary captures the essence of our move in two sentences, there's so much more to the 
story. If you're interested in the details, continue reading this post.

<!--more-->

<script type="text/javascript" charset="utf-8" async src="https://api-maps.yandex.ru/services/constructor/1.0/js/?um=constructor%3Af617a2cafaf1b1a9c4b8c0006872fe6045e9defbef2d57fcd1bc7e0f43af8a20&amp;width=880&amp;height=353&amp;lang=en_FR&amp;scroll=true"></script>

# Prepare for boarding!

Our journey began well before the 16th of September. It truly started when my wife, Tanya, received her 

> offer from KTH (Royal Institute of Technology) in Stockholm in July 2022. We spent two months preparing 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
offer from KTH Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm in July 2022. We spent two months preparing 
```

As of 2023, due to sanctions, Russian cards don't work outside of Russia. This poses significant 
challenges, especially for those looking to book in advance or move to Sweden.

For our journey to Stockholm, we needed:

- Tickets from Saint-Petersburg to Helsinki
- A one-night stay in Helsinki (just in case there were problems at the border)
- Tickets from Helsinki to Stockholm
- Accommodation in Stockholm

We had to take such a long route because there are no direct flights or ferries from Saint Petersburg 
or Moscow to Stockholm. The only alternative was flying via certain southern countries that still 
maintain flight connections with Russia.

However, flying imposed stricter luggage restrictions. We had numerous items to bring, and we wanted to 
avoid overthinking our luggage.

Below is a table comparing the costs for two people, round trip. Airplane prices range from the 
cheapest to the most convenient options.

| Airplane   | Bus-Hotel-Ferry          |
|:----------:|:------------------------:|
|€1294-€4449 | 232€ + 164€ + 252€ = 648€|

Clearly, the bus-hotel-ferry combination was the most cost-effective and convenient way to reach 
Stockholm.

> **So what we did ourselves**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**So what we did**
```

because the card linked to my profile was still accepted. However, I'm uncertain if this would work for 
a newly registered account.

I believe we could do that only because we had a card linked to my booking account. If not, we might 
have had to resort to platforms like ozon travel or aviasales.
{: .notice--info} 

**What we were able to do only because we had friends and family abroad**

We aimed to take a [Silja ferry](https://en.tallink.com/book-a-cruise) to Stockholm since it didn't 
impose weight or baggage quantity restrictions. However, as you might have already guessed, Silja 
ferries did not accept Russian debit cards. So, we asked my friend in Armenia to pay on our behalf, 
and we reimbursed him in rubles via his Russian bank account. For accommodation, my wife's uncle in 
Canada agreed to cover two months of our stay, and my wife's father reimbursed him via a SWIFT transfer.

It's worth noting that without my Armenian friend, David, and our international connections, we 
couldn't have managed certain payments, like the Swedish council fee. Reflecting on this, I often 

> thought about individuals from remote Russian regions without such connections. We truly are fortunate 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
thought about individuals without any friends or relatives abroad. We truly are fortunate 
```

- **Nintendo Switch**! Man, if you need to travel a lot, that's a great entertaining companion
- [**Bag for Nintendo Switch**](https://market.yandex.ru/product--dorozhnaia-sumka-game-traveler-deluxe-system-case-dlia-nintendo-switch-switch-oled/1655046229?sku=101565585033&cpa=1&uniqueId=60311091)

**Update from August 2023:**<br>
But again, I highly recommend checking out the packing lists on [packhacker.com](https://packhacker.com/). 
While I relied on common sense and didn't consult any guides, their packing lists are much more 
comprehensive.
{: .notice--info} 

### Scooters 🛴

When we were getting ready and evaluating our potential living areas, I explored our surroundings 
on Google Street View. The abundance of bike lanes in Stockholm looked promising. Additionally, 
videos from [Varlamov](https://www.youtube.com/@ilyavrlmv) encouraged us to try scooters. So we 
did. It was an immediate oversight, not catastrophic, but regrettable.

The issue was that we brought many items with us, and the scooters felt like the straw that 
might break the camel's back. Fortunately, it didn't come to that, but it was a close call. In 

> Stockholm, it turned out that scooters weren't particularly useful. The buses are efficient, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stockholm, it turned out that scooters without engine weren't particularly useful. The buses are efficient, 
```

and the pavements aren't scooter-friendly.

**Update from August 2023:**<br>
We really didn't need the scooters. They turned out to be inconvenient in Stockholm. The 

> pavement is rough, there are many hills, and it's often wet. A bike would definitely be a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pavement is rough, there are many hills, and it's often wet. A bike or electric scooter would definitely be a 
```

happen](https://meduza.io/feature/2022/09/20/kazhetsya-v-rossii-vseriez-gotovyat-mobilizatsiyu-i-radi-etogo-dazhe-perepisali-ugolovnyy-kodeks-chto-delat-esli-ya-ne-hochu-voevat), 
despite its unpopularity. Every day from the 12th to the 16th, we checked the news about it. 
But everything was alright when we left.

The bus was scheduled to leave at 14:00 MSK. The day before, Irina (Tanya's Mother) arrived in 
Saint-Petersburg. We rented an apartment for her nearby, so she just came to our place, and we 
took a taxi to the bus station. For some reason, there were significant traffic jams in the 
city, and I was concerned we might be late. However, we arrived 20 minutes before departure. My 
parents arrived at the place 5 minutes before the bus left. We were in the queue for the bus 
when Mom called me, crying. They were by the station's fence, just 10 meters away. I told her 
to come inside so we could say our goodbyes properly. She didn't hear me; she was sobbing. I 
asked Tanya to watch our belongings and ran into the station. We hugged one last time, and I 
rushed back. They were at the fence again. I called them, and we agreed to stay in touch. As 

> the bus pulled away, I began to cry, a sorrow that lasted for about 20 minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the bus pulled away, I also began to cry.
```

{% include figure
image_path="https://blog-image.fra1.cdn.digitaloceanspaces.com/sk%C3%B6ldpaddan-or-moving-to-sweden/SPB/on-the-last-day/IMG_3265.HEIC.jpg"
caption="Bus station"
%}

{% include video id="huSW52e3RKU" width="111" provider="youtube" caption="My awesome video" %}

> When I calmed down, I felt this joy and excitement from the trip ahead. I remembered how Tanya 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After calming down, I experienced a sense of joy and excitement for the upcoming trip. I remembered how Tanya 
```

{% include gallery id="ferry-cabin-views" caption="Ferry cabin views" %}

{% include gallery id="ferry-deck-views" caption="Ferry deck views" %}

{% include figure image_path="https://blog-image.fra1.cdn.digitaloceanspaces.com/sk%C3%B6ldpaddan-or-moving-to-sweden/Ferry/DSCF2339.jpg" alt="Two seagulls flying to Stockholm" caption="Two seagulls flying to Stockholm" %}

{% include gallery id="water-views-from-the-ferry" caption="Water patterns" %}

{% include figure image_path="https://blog-image.fra1.cdn.digitaloceanspaces.com/sk%C3%B6ldpaddan-or-moving-to-sweden/Ferry/DSCF2945.jpg" alt="Sunset" caption="Sunset from the ferry" %}

## First impressions

Up until that point we had little to no problems with not having a working bank card. Sure, it 
was a bit inconvenient, but euro cash in Finland was fine.

But the moment we stepped on the shore of Stockholm, we realized that we had to get to the 
hotel. And while figuring out what to do, we realized that all taxis were gone, there were no 
people at the terminal, and we didn't really know where to go from there. Thinking about it 
now, we should have asked for help from friends who were in Stockholm or either of our 

> employers. But we had to do something right now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
employers. But we had to do something at that moment.
```

{% include figure
image_path="https://blog-image.fra1.cdn.digitaloceanspaces.com/sk%C3%B6ldpaddan-or-moving-to-sweden/Stockholm/close-to-magnolia-house/2022-09-28-17-09-10.JPG"
caption="Sheep close to houses" %}

Cute ducks eating apples
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/M7ChUo09JSo?si=dtRz6vMDDcS_n8OU" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Calm water
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/IrB8kBGwOTc?si=S7xuiHiX7oRAfA6m" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

{% include gallery id="norrviken-nature" caption="Norrviken nature" layout="half" %}

{% include figure image_path="https://blog-image.fra1.cdn.digitaloceanspaces.com/sk%C3%B6ldpaddan-or-moving-to-sweden/Stockholm/DSCF0809.JPG" alt="Sunrise" caption="Sunrise on horizon - View from the apartment in Stockholm" %}

# Final word on 19.09.2023

> It was a year since Tanya started working at KTH, since we moved to Sweden. So many things

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It was a year since Tanya started working at KTH and since we moved to Sweden. So many things
```
